+++
date = "2015-06-20T16:00:25+02:00"
draft = true
title = "Grokking xv6, part 1"

+++

This is my first post in a series on grokking xv6, a simple unix teaching
operating-system based on UNIX. *To grok something* means to understand it
intuitively or empathetically.

<!--more-->

When I quit my last job, I asked the CTO, a programmer whose ability I highly
respect, what he thought were my biggest weaknesses as a programmer. His answer
was clear: systems programming and type systems. What is systems programming?
The short answer is: software that isn't application software.

On the late Richard Feynman's blackboard you can read: *Know how to solve every
problem that has ever been solved* and *What I cannot create I do not
understand*.  This is of course just an ambition. And while I don't share his
ambition for being able to solve every problem that has ever been solved, I
think he's spot on when it comes to achieving deep understanding. Consider this
my attempt at grokking systems programming.

C and UNIX have been around for 30 years and they are likely to be around in
another 30 years. While I don't have much experience writing C, I have a lot of
respect for it as an abstraction. Together with Lisp, it strikes me as cleanest
model of programming that exists (I took that one from [Paul
Graham](http://www.paulgraham.com/rootsoflisp.html)).

## Hypothesis

- With dedicated study, I will be able to understand every single line in xv6.

- By 

- It's possible to learn the xv6 source with just a few weeks of dedicated
  study.

By learn xv6 we mean

- After grokking xv6 you'll have a firm grasp of fundamental OS concepts.
-- Enough to contribute a patch to Linux or FreeBSD.
-- To understand modern OSs.


Get to first patch.


## Experiment

## Conclusion









## Code journal stuff

Slow day today. A bunch of half-assed attempts at various projects I've been
meaning to do, but no real progress.

I also started reading the xv6 book - "a simple, Unix-like teaching operating
system".  Getting started with xv6, a simple Unix-like teaching operating system


Not a lot of coding done today; spent a bunch of time debugging compiler
toolchain things for xv6. Got it to compile by setting up a small VPS with Linux
on it instead of messing around with custom builds of gcc.

Reviewed some shell basics. Apparently there are 382 words in the standard
dictionary that have no a, e, i, o, or u. That's pretty cool.

> grep -Ev 'a|A|e|E|i|I|o|O|u|U' /usr/share/dict/words | wc -l

I started doing the shell homework and realized I needed to brush up on (or,
                                                                          rather,
                                                                          learn)
C. Looked into the course that xv6 is based on and its prerequisites and here's
what I found:

The xv6 booklet is based on the Operating System Engineering course at MIT,
6.828.  This course has, among other things, a pre-requisite of the material in
course 6.033 which in turn has a strong pre-requisite 6.004 (which I know
                                                                   probably less
                                                                   than 50% of).
Yelp! Better get to work.

Tomorrow I'll get started coding for real and post more about this project and
why I'm doing it in my Experiments Journal. Stay tuned.

* get xv6 to compile
Learning C and xv6


Reviewed K&R today and did a speed-tour of the first half of the book, writing
some small programs in C and taking notes of constructs I was using that I
wasn't 100% sure on. For example: prefix vs postfix incrementor, pointers, array
initialization and nil-termination.

I've started deep diving into the xv6 source code and booklet, starting with the
shell file as an entry point, looking up any constructs I don't understand with
K&R, man pages, SO, etc. It's a lot of work but I'm slowly and surely getting an
understanding of the code.

Here's another grepism to find all occurrences of fgets in pwd and subdirs, in
.c and .h files:

> grep -r --include=*.{c,h} fgets .

(The reason grep -r fgets *.c *.h doesn't work is because it expands the
     filenames before searching recursively.)

Instead of doing an announcement-style post over at Experi, I decided to just
wait until I had made some more progress with the actual coding. The first post
will be in a few days.

* write small programs in C from K&R: wc, strlen, swap.  complete exec function
* in xv6 shell
  get xv6 shell to redir and pipe More on the xv6 shell


Today I implemented redir, which allows you to write things like "ls > y". It's
pretty neat how it works. Here's the relevant code:

rcmd = (struct redircmd*)cmd; close(rcmd->fd); if (open(rcmd->file, rcmd->mode)
< 0) { fprintf(stderr, "open %s failed\n", rcmd->file); } runcmd(rcmd->cmd);

We close the file with the relevant file descriptor, either 0 for STIDN or 1 for
STDOUT. When we open the file we are redirected to it'll be assigned the lowest
file descriptor, which is the one we just closed. Once that's done we simply run
the desired command.

To avoid having to write "/bin/ls" and instead just be able to write "ls" I
wrote the following mini PATH logic. It's not great but it'll have to suffice
for now. It took me a while to understand how to use strcat, primarily because
my mental model of memory management was wrong.

char fullpath[100] = "/bin/"; strcat(fullpath, ecmd->argv[0]); if(ecmd->argv[0]
== 0) exit(0);
// First we try current directiory, then /bin/
execv(ecmd->argv[0], ecmd->argv); execv(fullpath, ecmd->argv);

* xv6 shell redir xv6 shell check in /bin/ dir too
  xv6 shell pipe run xv6 with qemu Implemented pipes. Done with shell part.

* look in /usr/bin too xv6 shell pipes work
  boot xv7 Use QEMU as a "remote debugging target" for GDB.

Without X or w/o virtual VGA.

make sure have gdb first?

make qemu-nox make qemu-nox-gdb
